---
layout: post
title: Debugging threaded application crash
date: 2013-01-12 14:44
---

Some time ago I had a nasty issue of an application crashing due to heap
corruption. Quite quickly I discovered it was related to the intensively
multi-threaded nature of the test case that reproduced the crash that happened
in the field. The call stacks used to end up somewhere in `malloc()`/`free()`
pair. I said they used to, as there where different ways it was crashing
(different call stacks in the back trace). It was another reason to think that
multiple threads were making harm to each other. To make this story more
exciting (or painful to me at that time), the problem couldn't be reproduced on
x86 PC. Only some specific timing conditions on the MIPSEL system could make the
crash happen.

## The story

The `malloc()`/`free()` functions are thread safe (even in uClibc). I proved it to
myself by looking at the back traces showing some internal locking functions
called from within `malloc()`/`free()` (obviously this could also be inferred from
the code). Once the memory is _malloc_-ed in one thread, there's no harm the other
thread can do as there's no way `malloc()` can have internal structures corrupted
from the other thread. The `free()` function is a different story. Although it is
not possible to free memory simultaneously (corrupt allocator structures), it is
possible to do it twice. Once per thread. This was my theory from the day one.

## Tools

First thing to do is to throw some ready to use tools at the problem. Ideally
I'd have looked at some reverse debugging tool, had I known at that time they
existed for real. Recently someone I worked with referred me to
[UndoDB](http://undo-software.com/) which I'd have at least evaluated, had I
known about it and if it were available for MIPSEL (it's not as of the time of
this writing). Most memory debugging tools have receded having their
functionality taken over by [Valgrind](http://valgrind.org/). As I was (un)lucky
to observe the problem only on the MIPSEL platform, there was no chance to use
it as it does not support MIPS(EL) and is [not
likely](http://valgrind.org/info/platforms.html) to support it in the near
future. Another one is [efence](http://linux.die.net/man/3/efence) which is
excellent in detecting memory corruption but it uses memory very intensively
(every `malloc()` call results in at least two pages allocated due to the way it
works). In my particular case the system was running out of memory when using
efence.

It was time to get a grip and write my own rough and ready tool.

## Let's crack on with it

The idea was to interpose `malloc()`/`free()` and their friends. Once they are
interposed, I could put my own housekeeping information in allocated blocks to
help analyse the cause of the crash. And even more, I could detect some
conditions, e. g. double `free()` calls.

First of all I wanted to have some counter incremented on every `free()` call and
once the non-zero value was detected I wanted it to abort immediately so I could
analyse the state and the context. It was also useful to store some information
(return address, thread ID) about the caller that _malloc_-ed the memory chunk and
the caller that _free_-ed it.

To make easier finding my housekeeping information when examining memory, I
wanted to put some magic and easy to spot values there. They would also serve as
execution fences, i. e. with LSB set on a value interpreted as a function
pointer, the call on many platforms would result in SIGBUS.

## Implementation

I got to the final implementation in few iterations after making some
mistakes. At least it might save someone's else time although getting through
all these mistakes was enriching. The implementation is (intended to be) thread
safe. Note that a naive use of mutexes here causes a lot of problems (atomic
operations are used directly instead). Similarly calling `printf()`-like
functions is not easy/possible as they call `malloc()`/`free()`.

The intention of this implementation is to detect double `free()` call under the
control of the debugger (similar to the way efence works). It is MIPSEL specific
but it should be easy to adapt for other platforms. It's available
[here](https://github.com/kkonopko/kriscience/blob/master/debugging-threaded-app/kris-malloc-mipsel.cpp). Below
I only present the gist of it.

{% highlight C++ %}
template<class Fn>
Fn getNextFunction(char const* const name) {
  ::dlerror();
  if (void* const sym = ::dlsym(RTLD_NEXT, name)) {
    return reinterpret_cast<Fn>(sym);
  }
  
  ABORT_HERE;
}

void* malloc(size_t size) {
  size_t ra;
  asm volatile("move %0, $ra" : "=r" (ra)); // get the return address

  typedef void*(*fn_malloc_t)(size_t);
  static fn_malloc_t fn_malloc = getNextFunction<fn_malloc_t>("malloc");

  char* const ptr =
    static_cast<char*>(fn_malloc(sizeof(MallocInfo) +
    size +
    sizeof(MallocInfoBack)));

  if (!ptr) {
    return ptr;
  }

  const MallocInfo info = {
    { MAGIC1, MAGIC1, MAGIC1, MAGIC1 },
    ra, pthread_self(), 0u, 0u, size, 0u,
    { MAGIC2, MAGIC2, MAGIC2, MAGIC2 }
    };

  const MallocInfoBack infoBack = {
    { MAGIC3, MAGIC3, MAGIC3, MAGIC3 },
    pthread_self(), size,
    { MAGIC4, MAGIC4, MAGIC4, MAGIC4 }
  };

  *reinterpret_cast<MallocInfo*>(ptr) = info;
  *reinterpret_cast<MallocInfoBack*>(ptr + sizeof(MallocInfo) + size) =
    infoBack;

  return ptr + sizeof(MallocInfo);
}

void free(void* ptr) {
  size_t ra;
  asm volatile("move %0, $ra" : "=r" (ra)); // get the return address
  typedef void (*fn_free_t)(void*);
  static fn_free_t fn_free = getNextFunction<fn_free_t>("free");

  if (ptr) {
    ptr = static_cast<char*>(ptr) - sizeof(MallocInfo);
    MallocInfo* const mi = reinterpret_cast<MallocInfo*>(ptr);

    if (0 != __sync_fetch_and_add(&mi->freeCnt, 1)) {
      // this is it - someone alreade freed the memory

      // now these two bits of information are preserved in the global variables
      // as the compiler may (re)use registers and stack heavily and it's easier
      // to find out in the disassembly where these values are stored when they
      // are assigned to global variables
      gRaFree = mi->raFree;
      gTidTerminator = mi->tidTerminator;

      ABORT_HERE;
    }

    mi->raFree = ra;
    mi->tidTerminator = pthread_self();
  }

  fn_free(ptr);
}
{% endhighlight %}

To compile/build:

{% highlight terminal %}
mipsel-linux-g++ \
  -shared -fPIC -O2 -o libkrismalloc.so \
  kris-malloc-mipsel.cpp -pthread -ldl
{% endhighlight %}

Now you can `LD_PRELOAD` it after transferring it onto the target system:

{% highlight terminal %}
gdb \
  -ex "set exec-wrapper env LD_PRELOAD=/kris/libkrismalloc.so" \
  --args <app> <args>
{% endhighlight %}

You can also compile it into an object file and link it statically into your
executable, although it's slightly less flexible.

## Usage

Basically you need a bit of luck if the problem is strongly related to thread
race conditions. You can make yourself luckier by reducing the test case to the
very minimum and making it more thread intensive if possible. This will let you
get to the crash point sooner so you can repeat attempts more often.


On my MIPSEL system I got something like this:

{% highlight terminal %}
Program received signal SIGSEGV, Segmentation fault.
[Switching to Thread 0x42361520 (LWP 28702)]
0x2aac09d0 in free () from /kris/libkrismalloc.so
{% endhighlight %}

Lucky me. I did `x/i $pc` and got:

{% highlight terminal %}
0x2aac09d0 <free+196>:  sw  zero,0(zero)
{% endhighlight %}

I was very lucky. I could examine the housekeeping information in the allocated
block and it's still not clobbered.

How to examine preserved information? The argument passed to `free()` should be
passed in the `$a0` register due to MIPS(EL) calling convention. If you compile
the interposing library with `-O2`, which is useful to keep the speed and to not
affect the race conditions between threads, then you may be a wee bit less
lucky. The `$a0` register might get reused for something else and you need to look
around in the disassembly for the register where the `$a0` is copied to (it has to
be copied if `$a0` gets reused). In my case it used to be *`$s0`* register with
additional bonus of offsetting the memory block pointer to the housekeeping
information. Hence I was examining it like this (I marked some elements with
(1), (2), ... to comment on them later on):

{% highlight termina %}
(gdb) x/20xw $s0
0xbd96c8: (1) 0xaaaaaaaa     0xaaaaaaaa     0xaaaaaaaa     0xaaaaaaaa
0xbd96d8: (2) 0x2b566d84 (3) 0x2cf21520 (4) 0x2b6ae248 (5) 0x2cf21520
0xbd96e8: (6) 0x00000088 (7) 0x00000002 (8) 0xbbbbbbbb     0xbbbbbbbb
0xbd96f8:     0xbbbbbbbb     0xbbbbbbbb     0x00000000     0x00000000
0xbd9708:     0x0025002f     0x00450037     0x006c0066     0x00730061

##
# get the name of the function that originally freed the memory
# (note that I have release build with debug information)
#

(gdb) x/i 0x2b6ae248
0x2b6ae248 <operator delete(void *, unsigned int, const char *, int, struct
{...} *)+120>:  lw  gp,16(s8)
{% endhighlight %}

A legend (memory interpretation according to the `MallocInfo` structure): (1) -
MallocInfo begin marker (2) - the address of the caller that _malloc_-ed memory
(3) - the thread ID of the caller that _malloc_-ed memory (4) - the address of
the caller that originally _free_-ed memory (5) - the thread ID of the caller
that originally free-ed memory (6) - the size of the allocated block (7) -
`free()` calls counter (8) - `MallocInfo` end marker Moving forwards and
backwards with memory examination you should also find the `MallocInfoBack`
structure. It helps a lot if you are unlucky and some part of any housekeeping
information gets clobbered.

## The happy end

This method helped me to track the problem down to a `std::string` variable being
not locked properly. Adding a lock on a mutex when accessing it solved the
problem. The code base was large enough to make it impossible to find the
problem by simple code inspection and adding to that thread unsafe use of this
particular variable wasn't obvious from the code at a first glance. So having a
nice crash and a right approach can set you right on the track.
